Data compression docs (#915)
minio/docs: source/administration/object-management/data-compression.rst

.. _minio-data-compression:

================
Data Compression
================

.. default-domain:: minio

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Overview
--------

MinIO Server supports compressing objects to reduce disk usage.

> Objects are compressed before they are written to disk and uncompressed when read, making the compression process transparent to client applications and services.

Author: yeah that's much better, manually added 👍🏻

Depending on the type of data, compression may also increase overall throughput.
Write throughput for compressible data is generally 500MB per second or greater per available CPU.

> Decompression is typically at least 1 GB per second.

Author: How specific should we be about performance here? These numbers are from the readme.

Reviewer: @klauspost to confirm, but I think we should avoid numbers as it sets expectations that depend on the user having a CPU that is not a potato.

We could keep it general and say "Deployments following MinIO's recommended production configurations typically see..." and that should do it?

Reviewer 2: I think there are enough qualifiers already (generally/typically).

Author: I rewrote this paragraph a bit, including using Ravind's text.

Data compression is a global option, configured settings apply to all buckets in a deployment.

> You can control which objects are compressed by specifying the desired file extensions and media types.

Author: Re: "media type"

"MIME type" is an outdated but still widely used term. "Media type" is current. Normally I would go with the current term, but the config option is called `mime_types`. Recommendations?

Reviewer: We could the ol' fashioned

```
...by specifying the desired file extensions and `media types (MIME) <some link to wikipedia>`__
```

.. admonition:: Existing objects are not modified
   :class: note

   Enabling, disabling, or updating a deployment's compression settings does not modify existing objects.
   New objects are compressed according to the settings in effect at the time they are created.

Incompressible Data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some types of objects cannot be effectively compressed, such as video or already compressed data.
MinIO does not compress common incompressible file types, even if they are specified in the compression configuration.

Objects of these types are never compressed:

File extensions

- ``gz``, ``bz2``, ``rar``, ``zip``, ``7z``, ``xz``, ``mp4``, ``mkv``, ``mov``

Media types

> - ``video/*``, ``audio/*``, ``application/zip``, ``application/x-gzip``, ``application/x-bz2``, ``application/x-compress``, ``application/x-xz``

Author: TODO: some reasonable table format to show these. (Also in several other locations, may become an include?)

Reviewer: Could do an unordered list + the `.. dropdown::` to let users manually expand each list to view the contents.

	
Data Compression and Encryption
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

MinIO supports encrypting compressed objects but recommends against encryption for most deployments.

> An important concern is a 3rd party may be able to learn details of an object's contents by comparing the uncompressed and compressed file sizes.

Author: Perhaps link to the relevant readme for more details. How much detail about the security considerations is appropriate here?

Reviewer: I *think* it's sufficient to link to Andrea's blog post and let the user decide from there. We could drop all of line 54 and integrate into line 53 as

```
...recommends `against combining encryption and compression for most deployents <bloglink>`__
```

Author: [This is the blog post in question](https://blog.min.io/c-e-compression-encryption/)

Tons of good info, but old enough that it says we don't have an option to encrypt compressed objects. (Feature added January 2021.)

Author: Linked to newer blog post from Klaus, which also discusses encrypting compressed objects.

Existing uncompressed objects are not modified.
To configure which extensions and types to compress, see :ref:`minio-data-compression-configure-objects`.

To view the current compression settings:

.. code-block:: shell
   :class: copyable

   mc admin config set ALIAS compression

Disable Data Compression
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To disable data compression, use :mc-cmd:`mc admin config set` to set the :mc-conf:`compression` key :mc-conf:`~compression.enable` option to ``off``:

The following disables data compression for new objects:

.. code-block:: shell
   :class: copyable

   mc admin config set ALIAS compression enable=off

- Replace ``ALIAS`` with the :mc:`alias <mc alias>` of a configured MinIO deployment.

Existing compressed objects are not modified.

.. _minio-data-compression-configure-objects:

Configure Which Objects to Compress
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Configure the objects to compress by specifying the desired file extensions and media types in :mc-conf:`~compression.extensions` or :mc-conf:`~compression.mime_types` arguments.

By default, MinIO compresses the following extensions and types:

> * File extensions: ``.txt``, ``.log``, ``.csv``, ``.json``, ``.tar``, ``.xml``, ``.bin``

Reviewer: Could move this to its own H2

```
Default Compressible Formats
--------------------------------------------

MinIO supports compressing the following...by default upon enabling Compression with no other arguments or configuration parameters...

Author: 👍🏻 rearranged a slightly different way

* Media types: ``text/*``, ``application/json``, ``application/xml``, ``binary/octet-stream``

.. admonition:: Default excluded extensions and types are never compressed
   :class: note

   Some objects cannot be efficiently compressed.
   MinIO will not attempt to compress these objects, even if they are specified in :mc-conf:`~compression.extensions` or :mc-conf:`~compression.mime_types` arguments.

The sections below describe how to configure compression for the desired file extensions and media types.

Compress All Compressible Objects
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> To compress all objects except the default excluded ones, use :mc-cmd:`mc admin config set` to set the :mc-conf:`compression` key :mc-conf:`~compression.extensions` and :mc-conf:`~compression.mime_types` options to empty lists.

Author: this needs a link to the default settings

> The following compresses all objects, except the default incompressible objects:

Reviewer: create a label link for incompressible objects and point to that here

Reviewer: Also - 100% all objects, or just the defaults (https://github.com/minio/minio/blob/005a4a275ab9edd3e9e3f92696ab88064d3d42dd/internal/config/compress/compress.go#L48-L49)

Reviewer: that is, does blank = wildcard

Author: Empty list is effectively a wildcard, excepting the default excluded stuff.

.. code-block:: shell
   :class: copyable

   mc admin config set ALIAS compression extensions= mime_types=

- Replace ``ALIAS`` with the :mc:`alias <mc alias>` of a configured MinIO deployment.

  
Compress Objects by File Extension
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

To compress objects with certain file extensions, use :mc-cmd:`mc admin config set` to set the :mc-conf:`compression` key :mc-conf:`~compression.extensions` option to a list of the desired file extensions.

The following command compresses files with the extensions ``.bin`` and ``.txt``:

.. code-block:: shell
   :class: copyable

>    mc admin config set ALIAS compression extensions=".bin, .txt"

Author: I tested this and having the space is ok. The original examples from the readme omit whitespace between items. Unless there is a concern, going with space for readability.

- Replace ``ALIAS`` with the :mc:`alias <mc alias>` of a configured MinIO deployment.

The new list of file extensions replaces the previous list.
To add or remove an extension, repeat the :mc-conf:`~compression.extensions` command with the complete list of extensions to compress.

The following command adds ``.pdf`` to the list of file extensions from the previous example:

.. code-block:: shell
   :class: copyable

   mc admin config set ALIAS compression extensions=".bin, .txt, .pdf"

- Replace ``ALIAS`` with the :mc:`alias <mc alias>` of a configured MinIO deployment.

Compress Objects by Media Type
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

To compress objects of certain types, use :mc-cmd:`mc admin config set` to set the :mc-conf:`compression` key :mc-conf:`~compression.mime_types` option to a list of the desired types.

The following example compresses files of types ``application/json`` and ``image/png``:

.. code-block:: shell
   :class: copyable

>    mc admin config set ALIAS compression mime_types="application/json, image/png"

Reviewer: since we ignore `*.png` maybe a different image format would be better here. TIFF? Those are uncompressed by default. or RAW

Reviewer: though RAW apparently has different mime types depending, so BMP maybe

--------

MinIO Server supports compressing objects to reduce disk usage.
Objects are compressed on PUT before writing to disk, and uncompressed on GET before they are sent to the client. This makes the compression process transparent to client applications and services.

Depending on the type of data, compression may also increase overall throughput.

> Write throughput for a production deployment is generally 500MB per second or greater per available CPU.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Write throughput for a production deployment is generally 500MB per second or greater per available CPU core in the system.
```

> Decompression is approximately 1 GB per second or greater.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Decompression is approximately 1 GB per second or greater for each CPU core.
```

.. include:: /includes/common-mc-admin-config.rst
   :start-after: start-minio-data-compression-default-desc
   :end-before: end-minio-data-compression-default-desc

You can control which objects are compressed by specifying the desired file extensions and `media (MIME) types <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Media_type>`__.

.. admonition:: Existing objects are not modified
   :class: note

   Enabling, disabling, or updating a deployment's compression settings does not modify existing objects.
   New objects are compressed according to the settings in effect at the time they are created.

.. _minio-data-compression-excluded-types:

Excluded File Types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some data cannot be effectively compressed, such as video or already compressed data.
MinIO does not compress common incompressible file types, even if they are specified in the compression configuration.

Objects of these types are never compressed:

.. include:: /includes/common-mc-admin-config.rst
   :start-after: start-minio-data-compression-default-excluded-desc
   :end-before: end-minio-data-compression-default-excluded-desc

Data Compression and Encryption
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> MinIO supports encrypting compressed objects but recommends against combining compression and encryption for most deployments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MinIO supports encrypting compressed objects but recommends against combining compression and encryption without a prior risk assessment.
```
